# 1.1 Introduction

**Definition:** A computer is an electronic machine that takes input from the user, processes the given input and instructions, and generates output in the form of useful information.

**Input Data:** Data refers to the raw data, programs, and user reply that need to be processed to generate useful information.

**Programs:** Refer to the set of instructions that can be executed by the computer in a sequential or non-sequential manner.

**Main Task:** The main task of a computer system is to process the given input (data) to generate output (information) of any type in an efficient manner.

**Other Names for a Computer:** A computer is also known by various other names, such as: Data processing unit, Data processor, Data processing system

---

### Core Components and Characteristics

**Central Processing Unit (CPU)** <br> 
The processor of the computer responsible for controlling and executing instructions. It is considered the "brain" of the computer.

**Monitor** <br> 
Displays information in visual form after receiving video signals from the computer.

**Speed** <br>
Computers are fast electronic devices that can solve large and complex problems quickly. Speed depends upon hardware configuration.

**Storage Capacity** <br>
Computers can store a huge amount of data in different formats. Storage area is divided into two categories: main memory and secondary storage.

**Accuracy** <br>
Computers carry out calculations with great accuracy. The accuracy depends on hardware configuration and instructions.

**Reliability** <br>
Computers produce results with no error, making them very trustworthy machines.

**Versatility** <br>
Computers are versatile machines that can perform many different tasks and can be used for many different purposes.

**Diligence** <br>
Computers can perform repetitive calculations any number of times with the same accuracy, as they do not suffer from fatigue, lack of concentration, or tiredness.

**Dumb Machine / Lack of Common Sense** <br>
A computer is a dumb machine; it does what it is instructed to do. It cannot make decisions in situations where qualitative considerations are involved.

**GIGO Principle** <br>
Garbage In, Garbage Out. If a computer is given any wrong instruction or faulty logic, it will result in erroneous output.
